2.1 Why Is Research Important?

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain how scientific research addresses questions about behavior
• Discuss how scientific research guides public policy
• Appreciate how scientific research can be important in making personal decisions
Scientific research is a critical tool for successfully navigating our complex world. Without it, we would be
forced to rely solely on intuition, other people’s authority, and blind luck. While many of us feel confident in
our abilities to decipher and interact with the world around us, history is filled with examples of how very
wrong we can be when we fail to recognize the need for evidence in supporting claims. At various times in
history, we would have been certain that the sun revolved around a flat earth, that the earth’s continents did
not move, and that mental illness was caused by possession (Figure 2.2). It is through systematic scientific
research that we divest ourselves of our preconceived notions and superstitions and gain an objective
understanding of ourselves and our world.
FIGURE 2.2 Some of our ancestors, across the world and over the centuries, believed that trephination—the
practice of making a hole in the skull, as shown here—allowed evil spirits to leave the body, thus curing mental
illness and other disorders. (credit: “taiproject”/Flickr)
The goal of all scientists is to better understand the world around them. Psychologists focus their attention on
understanding behavior, as well as the cognitive (mental) and physiological (body) processes that underlie
behavior. In contrast to other methods that people use to understand the behavior of others, such as intuition
and personal experience, the hallmark of scientific research is that there is evidence to support a claim.
Scientific knowledge is empirical: It is grounded in objective, tangible evidence that can be observed time and
time again, regardless of who is observing.
While behavior is observable, the mind is not. If someone is crying, we can see behavior. However, the reason
for the behavior is more difficult to determine. Is the person crying due to being sad, in pain, or happy?
Sometimes we can learn the reason for someone’s behavior by simply asking a question, like “Why are you
crying?” However, there are situations in which an individual is either uncomfortable or unwilling to answer
the question honestly, or is incapable of answering. For example, infants would not be able to explain why they
are crying. In such circumstances, the psychologist must be creative in finding ways to better understand
behavior. This chapter explores how scientific knowledge is generated, and how important that knowledge is in
forming decisions in our personal lives and in the public domain.

Access for free at openstax.org
Use of Research Information
Trying to determine which theories are and are not accepted by the scientific community can be difficult,
especially in an area of research as broad as psychology. More than ever before, we have an incredible amount
of information at our fingertips, and a simple internet search on any given research topic might result in a
number of contradictory studies. In these cases, we are witnessing the scientific community going through the
process of reaching a consensus, and it could be quite some time before a consensus emerges. For example,
the explosion in our use of technology has led researchers to question whether this ultimately helps or hinders
us. The use and implementation of technology in educational settings has become widespread over the last few
decades. Researchers are coming to different conclusions regarding the use of technology. To illustrate this
point, a study investigating a smartphone app targeting surgery residents (graduate students in surgery
training) found that the use of this app can increase student engagement and raise test scores (Shaw & Tan,
2015). Conversely, another study found that the use of technology in undergraduate student populations had
negative impacts on sleep, communication, and time management skills (Massimini & Peterson, 2009). Until
sufficient amounts of research have been conducted, there will be no clear consensus on the effects that
technology has on a student's acquisition of knowledge, study skills, and mental health.
In the meantime, we should strive to think critically about the information we encounter by exercising a degree
of healthy skepticism. When someone makes a claim, we should examine the claim from a number of different
perspectives: what is the expertise of the person making the claim, what might they gain if the claim is valid,
does the claim seem justified given the evidence, and what do other researchers think of the claim? This is
especially important when we consider how much information in advertising campaigns and on the internet
claims to be based on “scientific evidence” when in actuality it is a belief or perspective of just a few
individuals trying to sell a product or draw attention to their perspectives.
We should be informed consumers of the information made available to us because decisions based on this
information have significant consequences. One such consequence can be seen in politics and public policy.
Imagine that you have been elected as the governor of your state. One of your responsibilities is to manage the
state budget and determine how to best spend your constituents’ tax dollars. As the new governor, you need to
decide whether to continue funding early intervention programs. These programs are designed to help
children who come from low-income backgrounds, have special needs, or face other disadvantages. These
programs may involve providing a wide variety of services to maximize the children's development and
position them for optimal levels of success in school and later in life (Blann, 2005). While such programs
sound appealing, you would want to be sure that they also proved effective before investing additional money
in these programs. Fortunately, psychologists and other scientists have conducted vast amounts of research on
such programs and, in general, the programs are found to be effective (Neil & Christensen, 2009; PetersScheffer, Didden, Korzilius, & Sturmey, 2011). While not all programs are equally effective, and the short-term
effects of many such programs are more pronounced, there is reason to believe that many of these programs
produce long-term benefits for participants (Barnett, 2011). If you are committed to being a good steward of
taxpayer money, you would want to look at research. Which programs are most effective? What characteristics
of these programs make them effective? Which programs promote the best outcomes? After examining the
research, you would be best equipped to make decisions about which programs to fund.
LINK TO LEARNING
Watch this video about early childhood program effectiveness (http://openstax.org/l/programeffect) to learn
how scientists evaluate effectiveness and how best to invest money into programs that are most effective.
Ultimately, it is not just politicians who can benefit from using research in guiding their decisions. We all might
look to research from time to time when making decisions in our lives. Imagine you just found out that your
sister Maria's child, Umberto, was recently diagnosed with autism. There are many treatments for autism that
help decrease the negative impact of autism on the individual. Some examples of treatments for autism are
applied behavior analysis (ABA), social communication groups, social skills groups, occupational therapy, and
even medication options. If Maria asked you for advice or guidance, what would you do? You would likely want
to review the research and learn about the efficacy of each treatment so you could best advise your sister.
In the end, research is what makes the difference between facts and opinions. Facts are observable realities,
and opinions are personal judgments, conclusions, or attitudes that may or may not be accurate. In the
scientific community, facts can be established only using evidence collected through empirical research.
NOTABLE RESEARCHERS
Psychological research has a long history involving important figures from diverse backgrounds. While the
introductory chapter discussed several researchers who made significant contributions to the discipline, there
are many more individuals who deserve attention in considering how psychology has advanced as a science
through their work (Figure 2.3). For instance, Margaret Floy Washburn (1871–1939) was the first woman to
earn a PhD in psychology. Her research focused on animal behavior and cognition (Margaret Floy Washburn,
PhD, n.d.). Mary Whiton Calkins (1863–1930) was a preeminent first-generation American psychologist who
opposed the behaviorist movement, conducted significant research into memory, and established one of the
earliest experimental psychology labs in the United States (Mary Whiton Calkins, n.d.).
Francis Sumner (1895–1954) was the first African American to receive a PhD in psychology in 1920. His
dissertation focused on issues related to psychoanalysis. Sumner also had research interests in racial bias and
educational justice. Sumner was one of the founders of Howard University’s department of psychology, and
because of his accomplishments, he is sometimes referred to as the “Father of Black Psychology.” Thirteen
years later, Inez Beverly Prosser (1895–1934) became the first African American woman to receive a PhD in
psychology. Prosser’s research highlighted issues related to education in segregated versus integrated schools,
and ultimately, her work was very influential in the hallmark Brown v. Board of Education Supreme Court
ruling that segregation of public schools was unconstitutional (Ethnicity and Health in America Series:
Featured Psychologists, n.d.).
FIGURE 2.3 (a) Margaret Floy Washburn was the first woman to earn a doctorate degree in psychology. (b) The
outcome of Brown v. Board of Education was influenced by the research of psychologist Inez Beverly Prosser, who
was the first African American woman to earn a PhD in psychology.
Although the establishment of psychology’s scientific roots occurred first in Europe and the United States, it
did not take much time until researchers from around the world began to establish their own laboratories and
research programs. For example, some of the first experimental psychology laboratories in South America
were founded by Horatio Piñero (1869–1919) at two institutions in Buenos Aires, Argentina (Godoy & Brussino,
2010). In India, Gunamudian David Boaz (1908–1965) and Narendra Nath Sen Gupta (1889–1944) established

Access for free at openstax.org
the first independent departments of psychology at the University of Madras and the University of Calcutta,
respectively. These developments provided an opportunity for Indian researchers to make important
contributions to the field (Gunamudian David Boaz, n.d.; Narendra Nath Sen Gupta, n.d.).
When the American Psychological Association (APA) was first founded in 1892, all of the members were White
males (Women and Minorities in Psychology, n.d.). However, by 1905, Mary Whiton Calkins was elected as the
first female president of the APA, and by 1946, nearly one-quarter of American psychologists were female.
Psychology became a popular degree option for students enrolled in the nation’s historically Black higher
education institutions, increasing the number of Black Americans who went on to become psychologists. Given
demographic shifts occurring in the United States and increased access to higher educational opportunities
among historically underrepresented populations, there is reason to hope that the diversity of the field will
increasingly match the larger population, and that the research contributions made by the psychologists of the
future will better serve people of all backgrounds (Women and Minorities in Psychology, n.d.).
The Process of Scientific Research
Scientific knowledge is advanced through a process known as the scientific method. Basically, ideas (in the
form of theories and hypotheses) are tested against the real world (in the form of empirical observations), and
those empirical observations lead to more ideas that are tested against the real world, and so on. In this sense,
the scientific process is circular. The types of reasoning within the circle are called deductive and inductive. In
deductive reasoning, ideas are tested in the real world; in inductive reasoning, real-world observations lead
to new ideas (Figure 2.4). These processes are inseparable, like inhaling and exhaling, but different research
approaches place different emphasis on the deductive and inductive aspects.
FIGURE 2.4 Psychological research relies on both inductive and deductive reasoning.
In the scientific context, deductive reasoning begins with a generalization—one hypothesis—that is then used
to reach logical conclusions about the real world. If the hypothesis is correct, then the logical conclusions
reached through deductive reasoning should also be correct. A deductive reasoning argument might go
something like this: All living things require energy to survive (this would be your hypothesis). Ducks are living
things. Therefore, ducks require energy to survive (logical conclusion). In this example, the hypothesis is
correct; therefore, the conclusion is correct as well. Sometimes, however, an incorrect hypothesis may lead to a
logical but incorrect conclusion. Consider this argument: all ducks are born with the ability to see. Quackers is
a duck. Therefore, Quackers was born with the ability to see. Scientists use deductive reasoning to empirically
test their hypotheses. Returning to the example of the ducks, researchers might design a study to test the
hypothesis that if all living things require energy to survive, then ducks will be found to require energy to
survive.
Deductive reasoning starts with a generalization that is tested against real-world observations; however,
inductive reasoning moves in the opposite direction. Inductive reasoning uses empirical observations to

construct broad generalizations. Unlike deductive reasoning, conclusions drawn from inductive reasoning
may or may not be correct, regardless of the observations on which they are based. For instance, you may
notice that your favorite fruits—apples, bananas, and oranges—all grow on trees; therefore, you assume that all
fruit must grow on trees. This would be an example of inductive reasoning, and, clearly, the existence of
strawberries, blueberries, and kiwi demonstrate that this generalization is not correct despite it being based
on a number of direct observations. Scientists use inductive reasoning to formulate theories, which in turn
generate hypotheses that are tested with deductive reasoning. In the end, science involves both deductive and
inductive processes.
For example, case studies, which you will read about in the next section, are heavily weighted on the side of
empirical observations. Thus, case studies are closely associated with inductive processes as researchers
gather massive amounts of observations and seek interesting patterns (new ideas) in the data. Experimental
research, on the other hand, puts great emphasis on deductive reasoning.
We’ve stated that theories and hypotheses are ideas, but what sort of ideas are they, exactly? A theory is a welldeveloped set of ideas that propose an explanation for observed phenomena. Theories are repeatedly checked
against the world, but they tend to be too complex to be tested all at once; instead, researchers create
hypotheses to test specific aspects of a theory.
A hypothesis is a testable prediction about how the world will behave if our idea is correct, and it is often
worded as an if-then statement (e.g., if I study all night, I will get a passing grade on the test). The hypothesis is
extremely important because it bridges the gap between the realm of ideas and the real world. As specific
hypotheses are tested, theories are modified and refined to reflect and incorporate the result of these tests
Figure 2.5.
FIGURE 2.5 The scientific method involves deriving hypotheses from theories and then testing those hypotheses. If
the results are consistent with the theory, then the theory is supported. If the results are not consistent, then the
theory should be modified and new hypotheses will be generated.
To see how this process works, let’s consider a specific theory and a hypothesis that might be generated from
that theory. As you’ll learn in a later chapter, the James-Lange theory of emotion asserts that emotional
experience relies on the physiological arousal associated with the emotional state. If you walked out of your
home and discovered a very aggressive snake waiting on your doorstep, your heart would begin to race and
your stomach churn. According to the James-Lange theory, these physiological changes would result in your

Access for free at openstax.org
feeling of fear. A hypothesis that could be derived from this theory might be that a person who is unaware of
the physiological arousal that the sight of the snake elicits will not feel fear.
A scientific hypothesis is also falsifiable, or capable of being shown to be incorrect. Recall from the
introductory chapter that Sigmund Freud had lots of interesting ideas to explain various human behaviors
(Figure 2.6). However, a major criticism of Freud’s theories is that many of his ideas are not falsifiable; for
example, it is impossible to imagine empirical observations that would disprove the existence of the id, the
ego, and the superego—the three elements of personality described in Freud’s theories. Despite this, Freud’s
theories are widely taught in introductory psychology texts because of their historical significance for
personality psychology and psychotherapy, and these remain the root of all modern forms of therapy.
FIGURE 2.6 Many of the specifics of (a) Freud's theories, such as (b) his division of the mind into id, ego, and
superego, have fallen out of favor in recent decades because they are not falsifiable. In broader strokes, his views
set the stage for much of psychological thinking today, such as the unconscious nature of the majority of
psychological processes.
In contrast, the James-Lange theory does generate falsifiable hypotheses, such as the one described above.
Some individuals who suffer significant injuries to their spinal columns are unable to feel the bodily changes
that often accompany emotional experiences. Therefore, we could test the hypothesis by determining how
emotional experiences differ between individuals who have the ability to detect these changes in their
physiological arousal and those who do not. In fact, this research has been conducted and while the emotional
experiences of people deprived of an awareness of their physiological arousal may be less intense, they still
experience emotion (Chwalisz, Diener, & Gallagher, 1988).
Scientific research’s dependence on falsifiability allows for great confidence in the information that it
produces. Typically, by the time information is accepted by the scientific community, it has been tested
repeatedly.

2.2 Approaches to Research

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the different research methods used by psychologists
• Discuss the strengths and weaknesses of case studies, naturalistic observation, surveys, and archival research
• Compare longitudinal and cross-sectional approaches to research
• Compare and contrast correlation and causation
There are many research methods available to psychologists in their efforts to understand, describe, and

explain behavior and the cognitive and biological processes that underlie it. Some methods rely on
observational techniques. Other approaches involve interactions between the researcher and the individuals
who are being studied—ranging from a series of simple questions to extensive, in-depth interviews—to wellcontrolled experiments.
Each of these research methods has unique strengths and weaknesses, and each method may only be
appropriate for certain types of research questions. For example, studies that rely primarily on observation
produce incredible amounts of information, but the ability to apply this information to the larger population is
somewhat limited because of small sample sizes. Survey research, on the other hand, allows researchers to
easily collect data from relatively large samples. While this allows for results to be generalized to the larger
population more easily, the information that can be collected on any given survey is somewhat limited and
subject to problems associated with any type of self-reported data. Some researchers conduct archival
research by using existing records. While this can be a fairly inexpensive way to collect data that can provide
insight into a number of research questions, researchers using this approach have no control on how or what
kind of data was collected. All of the methods described thus far are correlational in nature. This means that
researchers can speak to important relationships that might exist between two or more variables of interest.
However, correlational data cannot be used to make claims about cause-and-effect relationships.
Correlational research can find a relationship between two variables, but the only way a researcher can claim
that the relationship between the variables is cause and effect is to perform an experiment. In experimental
research, which will be discussed later in this chapter, there is a tremendous amount of control over variables
of interest. While this is a powerful approach, experiments are often conducted in artificial settings. This calls
into question the validity of experimental findings with regard to how they would apply in real-world settings.
In addition, many of the questions that psychologists would like to answer cannot be pursued through
experimental research because of ethical concerns.
Clinical or Case Studies
In 2011, the New York Times published a feature story on Krista and Tatiana Hogan, Canadian twin girls.
These particular twins are unique because Krista and Tatiana are conjoined twins, connected at the head.
There is evidence that the two girls are connected in a part of the brain called the thalamus, which is a major
sensory relay center. Most incoming sensory information is sent through the thalamus before reaching higher
regions of the cerebral cortex for processing.
LINK TO LEARNING
Watch this CBC video about Krista's and Tatiana's lives (http://openstax.org/l/hogans) to learn more.
The implications of this potential connection mean that it might be possible for one twin to experience the
sensations of the other twin. For instance, if Krista is watching a particularly funny television program, Tatiana
might smile or laugh even if she is not watching the program. This particular possibility has piqued the
interest of many neuroscientists who seek to understand how the brain uses sensory information.
These twins represent an enormous resource in the study of the brain, and since their condition is very rare, it
is likely that as long as their family agrees, scientists will follow these girls very closely throughout their lives to
gain as much information as possible (Dominus, 2011).
Over time, it has become clear that while Krista and Tatiana share some sensory experiences and motor
control, they remain two distinct individuals, which provides invaluable insight for researchers interested in
the mind and the brain (Egnor, 2017).
In observational research, scientists are conducting a clinical or case study when they focus on one person or
just a few individuals. Indeed, some scientists spend their entire careers studying just 10–20 individuals. Why
would they do this? Obviously, when they focus their attention on a very small number of people, they can gain

Access for free at openstax.org
a precious amount of insight into those cases. The richness of information that is collected in clinical or case
studies is unmatched by any other single research method. This allows the researcher to have a very deep
understanding of the individuals and the particular phenomenon being studied.
If clinical or case studies provide so much information, why are they not more frequent among researchers?
As it turns out, the major benefit of this particular approach is also a weakness. As mentioned earlier, this
approach is often used when studying individuals who are interesting to researchers because they have a rare
characteristic. Therefore, the individuals who serve as the focus of case studies are not like most other people.
If scientists ultimately want to explain all behavior, focusing attention on such a special group of people can
make it difficult to generalize any observations to the larger population as a whole. Generalizing refers to the
ability to apply the findings of a particular research project to larger segments of society. Again, case studies
provide enormous amounts of information, but since the cases are so specific, the potential to apply what’s
learned to the average person may be very limited.
Naturalistic Observation
If you want to understand how behavior occurs, one of the best ways to gain information is to simply observe
the behavior in its natural context. However, people might change their behavior in unexpected ways if they
know they are being observed. How do researchers obtain accurate information when people tend to hide their
natural behavior? As an example, imagine that your professor asks everyone in your class to raise their hand if
they always wash their hands after using the restroom. Chances are that almost everyone in the classroom will
raise their hand, but do you think hand washing after every trip to the restroom is really that universal?
This is very similar to the phenomenon mentioned earlier in this chapter: many individuals do not feel
comfortable answering a question honestly. But if we are committed to finding out the facts about hand
washing, we have other options available to us.
Suppose we send a classmate into the restroom to actually watch whether everyone washes their hands after
using the restroom. Will our observer blend into the restroom environment by wearing a white lab coat, sitting
with a clipboard, and staring at the sinks? We want our researcher to be inconspicuous—perhaps standing at
one of the sinks pretending to put in contact lenses while secretly recording the relevant information. This
type of observational study is called naturalistic observation: observing behavior in its natural setting. To
better understand peer exclusion, Suzanne Fanger collaborated with colleagues at the University of Texas to
observe the behavior of preschool children on a playground. How did the observers remain inconspicuous
over the duration of the study? They equipped a few of the children with wireless microphones (which the
children quickly forgot about) and observed while taking notes from a distance. Also, the children in that
particular preschool (a “laboratory preschool”) were accustomed to having observers on the playground
(Fanger, Frankel, & Hazen, 2012).
It is critical that the observer be as unobtrusive and as inconspicuous as possible: when people know they are
being watched, they are less likely to behave naturally. If you have any doubt about this, ask yourself how your
driving behavior might differ in two situations: In the first situation, you are driving down a deserted highway
during the middle of the day; in the second situation, you are being followed by a police car down the same
deserted highway (Figure 2.7).

FIGURE 2.7 Seeing a police car behind you would probably affect your driving behavior. (credit: Michael Gil)
It should be pointed out that naturalistic observation is not limited to research involving humans. Indeed,
some of the best-known examples of naturalistic observation involve researchers going into the field to
observe various kinds of animals in their own environments. As with human studies, the researchers maintain
their distance and avoid interfering with the animal subjects so as not to influence their natural behaviors.
Scientists have used this technique to study social hierarchies and interactions among animals ranging from
ground squirrels to gorillas. The information provided by these studies is invaluable in understanding how
those animals organize socially and communicate with one another. The anthropologist Jane Goodall, for
example, spent nearly five decades observing the behavior of chimpanzees in Africa (Figure 2.8). As an
illustration of the types of concerns that a researcher might encounter in naturalistic observation, some
scientists criticized Goodall for giving the chimps names instead of referring to them by numbers—using
names was thought to undermine the emotional detachment required for the objectivity of the study (McKie,
2010).
FIGURE 2.8 (a) Jane Goodall made a career of conducting naturalistic observations of (b) chimpanzee behavior.
(credit “Jane Goodall”: modification of work by Erik Hersman; “chimpanzee”: modification of work by “Afrika
Force”/Flickr.com)
The greatest benefit of naturalistic observation is the validity, or accuracy, of information collected
unobtrusively in a natural setting. Having individuals behave as they normally would in a given situation
means that we have a higher degree of ecological validity, or realism, than we might achieve with other
research approaches. Therefore, our ability to generalize the findings of the research to real-world situations is
enhanced. If done correctly, we need not worry about people or animals modifying their behavior simply
because they are being observed. Sometimes, people may assume that reality programs give us a glimpse into
authentic human behavior. However, the principle of inconspicuous observation is violated as reality stars are
followed by camera crews and are interviewed on camera for personal confessionals. Given that environment,
we must doubt how natural and realistic their behaviors are.
The major downside of naturalistic observation is that they are often difficult to set up and control. In our
restroom study, what if you stood in the restroom all day prepared to record people’s hand washing behavior
and no one came in? Or, what if you have been closely observing a troop of gorillas for weeks only to find that
they migrated to a new place while you were sleeping in your tent? The benefit of realistic data comes at a cost.
As a researcher you have no control of when (or if) you have behavior to observe. In addition, this type of
44 2 • Psychological Research
Access for free at openstax.org
observational research often requires significant investments of time, money, and a good dose of luck.
Sometimes studies involve structured observation. In these cases, people are observed while engaging in set,
specific tasks. An excellent example of structured observation comes from Strange Situation by Mary
Ainsworth (you will read more about this in the chapter on lifespan development). The Strange Situation is a
procedure used to evaluate attachment styles that exist between an infant and caregiver. In this scenario,
caregivers bring their infants into a room filled with toys. The Strange Situation involves a number of phases,
including a stranger coming into the room, the caregiver leaving the room, and the caregiver’s return to the
room. The infant’s behavior is closely monitored at each phase, but it is the behavior of the infant upon being
reunited with the caregiver that is most telling in terms of characterizing the infant’s attachment style with the
caregiver.
Another potential problem in observational research is observer bias. Generally, people who act as observers
are closely involved in the research project and may unconsciously skew their observations to fit their
research goals or expectations. To protect against this type of bias, researchers should have clear criteria
established for the types of behaviors recorded and how those behaviors should be classified. In addition,
researchers often compare observations of the same event by multiple observers, in order to test inter-rater
reliability: a measure of reliability that assesses the consistency of observations by different observers.
Surveys
Often, psychologists develop surveys as a means of gathering data. Surveys are lists of questions to be
answered by research participants, and can be delivered as paper-and-pencil questionnaires, administered
electronically, or conducted verbally (Figure 2.9). Generally, the survey itself can be completed in a short time,
and the ease of administering a survey makes it easy to collect data from a large number of people.
Surveys allow researchers to gather data from larger samples than may be afforded by other research
methods. A sample is a subset of individuals selected from a population, which is the overall group of
individuals that the researchers are interested in. Researchers study the sample and seek to generalize their
findings to the population. Generally, researchers will begin this process by calculating various measures of
central tendency from the data they have collected. These measures provide an overall summary of what a
typical response looks like. There are three measures of central tendency: mode, median, and mean. The
mode is the most frequently occurring response, the median lies at the middle of a given data set, and the
mean is the arithmetic average of all data points. Means tend to be most useful in conducting additional
analyses like those described below; however, means are very sensitive to the effects of outliers, and so one
must be aware of those effects when making assessments of what measures of central tendency tell us about a
data set in question.
FIGURE 2.9 Surveys can be administered in a number of ways, including electronically administered research, like
the survey shown here. (credit: Robert Nyman)
2.2 • Approaches to Research 45
There is both strength and weakness of the survey in comparison to case studies. By using surveys, we can
collect information from a larger sample of people. A larger sample is better able to reflect the actual diversity
of the population, thus allowing better generalizability. Therefore, if our sample is sufficiently large and
diverse, we can assume that the data we collect from the survey can be generalized to the larger population
with more certainty than the information collected through a case study. However, given the greater number of
people involved, we are not able to collect the same depth of information on each person that would be
collected in a case study.
Another potential weakness of surveys is something we touched on earlier in this chapter: People don't always
give accurate responses. They may lie, misremember, or answer questions in a way that they think makes
them look good. For example, people may report drinking less alcohol than is actually the case.
Any number of research questions can be answered through the use of surveys. One real-world example is the
research conducted by Jenkins, Ruppel, Kizer, Yehl, and Griffin (2012) about the backlash against the US ArabAmerican community following the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001. Jenkins and colleagues wanted to
determine to what extent these negative attitudes toward Arab-Americans still existed nearly a decade after
the attacks occurred. In one study, 140 research participants filled out a survey with 10 questions, including
questions asking directly about the participant’s overt prejudicial attitudes toward people of various
ethnicities. The survey also asked indirect questions about how likely the participant would be to interact with
a person of a given ethnicity in a variety of settings (such as, “How likely do you think it is that you would
introduce yourself to a person of Arab-American descent?”). The results of the research suggested that
participants were unwilling to report prejudicial attitudes toward any ethnic group. However, there were
significant differences between their pattern of responses to questions about social interaction with ArabAmericans compared to other ethnic groups: they indicated less willingness for social interaction with ArabAmericans compared to the other ethnic groups. This suggested that the participants harbored subtle forms of
prejudice against Arab-Americans, despite their assertions that this was not the case (Jenkins et al., 2012).
Archival Research
Some researchers gain access to large amounts of data without interacting with a single research participant.
Instead, they use existing records to answer various research questions. This type of research approach is
known as archival research. Archival research relies on looking at past records or data sets to look for
interesting patterns or relationships.
For example, a researcher might access the academic records of all individuals who enrolled in college within
the past ten years and calculate how long it took them to complete their degrees, as well as course loads,
grades, and extracurricular involvement. Archival research could provide important information about who is
most likely to complete their education, and it could help identify important risk factors for struggling
students (Figure 2.10).
FIGURE 2.10 A researcher doing archival research examines records, whether archived as a (a) hardcopy or (b)
electronically. (credit “paper files”: modification of work by “Newtown graffiti”/Flickr; “computer”: modification of
work by INPIVIC Family/Flickr)

Access for free at openstax.org
In comparing archival research to other research methods, there are several important distinctions. For one,
the researcher employing archival research never directly interacts with research participants. Therefore, the
investment of time and money to collect data is considerably less with archival research. Additionally,
researchers have no control over what information was originally collected. Therefore, research questions
have to be tailored so they can be answered within the structure of the existing data sets. There is also no
guarantee of consistency between the records from one source to another, which might make comparing and
contrasting different data sets problematic.
Longitudinal and Cross-Sectional Research
Sometimes we want to see how people change over time, as in studies of human development and lifespan.
When we test the same group of individuals repeatedly over an extended period of time, we are conducting
longitudinal research. Longitudinal research is a research design in which data-gathering is administered
repeatedly over an extended period of time. For example, we may survey a group of individuals about their
dietary habits at age 20, retest them a decade later at age 30, and then again at age 40.
Another approach is cross-sectional research. In cross-sectional research, a researcher compares multiple
segments of the population at the same time. Using the dietary habits example above, the researcher might
directly compare different groups of people by age. Instead of studying a group of people for 20 years to see
how their dietary habits changed from decade to decade, the researcher would study a group of 20-year-old
individuals and compare them to a group of 30-year-old individuals and a group of 40-year-old individuals.
While cross-sectional research requires a shorter-term investment, it is also limited by differences that exist
between the different generations (or cohorts) that have nothing to do with age per se, but rather reflect the
social and cultural experiences of different generations of individuals make them different from one another.
To illustrate this concept, consider the following survey findings. In recent years there has been significant
growth in the popular support of same-sex marriage. Many studies on this topic break down survey
participants into different age groups. In general, younger people are more supportive of same-sex marriage
than are those who are older (Jones, 2013). Does this mean that as we age we become less open to the idea of
same-sex marriage, or does this mean that older individuals have different perspectives because of the social
climates in which they grew up? Longitudinal research is a powerful approach because the same individuals
are involved in the research project over time, which means that the researchers need to be less concerned
with differences among cohorts affecting the results of their study.
Often longitudinal studies are employed when researching various diseases in an effort to understand
particular risk factors. Such studies often involve tens of thousands of individuals who are followed for several
decades. Given the enormous number of people involved in these studies, researchers can feel confident that
their findings can be generalized to the larger population. The Cancer Prevention Study-3 (CPS-3) is one of a
series of longitudinal studies sponsored by the American Cancer Society aimed at determining predictive risk
factors associated with cancer. When participants enter the study, they complete a survey about their lives and
family histories, providing information on factors that might cause or prevent the development of cancer. Then
every few years the participants receive additional surveys to complete. In the end, hundreds of thousands of
participants will be tracked over 20 years to determine which of them develop cancer and which do not.
Clearly, this type of research is important and potentially very informative. For instance, earlier longitudinal
studies sponsored by the American Cancer Society provided some of the first scientific demonstrations of the
now well-established links between increased rates of cancer and smoking (American Cancer Society, n.d.)
(Figure 2.11).

FIGURE 2.11 Longitudinal research like the CPS-3 help us to better understand how smoking is associated with
cancer and other diseases. (credit: CDC/Debora Cartagena)
As with any research strategy, longitudinal research is not without limitations. For one, these studies require
an incredible time investment by the researcher and research participants. Given that some longitudinal
studies take years, if not decades, to complete, the results will not be known for a considerable period of time.
In addition to the time demands, these studies also require a substantial financial investment. Many
researchers are unable to commit the resources necessary to see a longitudinal project through to the end.
Research participants must also be willing to continue their participation for an extended period of time, and
this can be problematic. People move, get married and take new names, get ill, and eventually die. Even
without significant life changes, some people may simply choose to discontinue their participation in the
project. As a result, the attrition rates, or reduction in the number of research participants due to dropouts, in
longitudinal studies are quite high and increases over the course of a project. For this reason, researchers
using this approach typically recruit many participants fully expecting that a substantial number will drop out
before the end. As the study progresses, they continually check whether the sample still represents the larger
population, and make adjustments as necessary.

